It's November the 13th, Friday, and I am visiting
with Dr. Jack Campbell, who has been in the
Department of Curriculum and Instruction since
1970. And Dr. Campbell is going to share a few of his
thoughts and perceptions about the changes that
have occurred at Texas A&M since he arrived,
perhaps something about what might have caused
some of these great changes and how it has affected
the growth of the college. And do you have a
particular change or a series of changes that have
occurred that stand out as the most important?
I think if I could just point out some of the things
as I've gone back over my notes that maybe some of
which you can use later on. The most important
changes I may not be in a position to know, but I've
learned about Texas A&M and the need for a
professor of foundations at the Annual meeting in
Chicago, 1970, February 28th and 29th. I was
attending the History of Education Society, John
Dewey Society, and saw the flyer, which I believe I
have given you. And I was surprised. Excuse me. At
the convention in February. I believe I have given
you a copy of it. I have a copy, yes.
Earl Jones was associate to
Dean Hill. Glenn Johnson was the chairman of the
PDCI. Paul Hensarling was with the Ed Ed
department and I think had, at one time, been a
candidate
for dean. Let's see, as I moved into the
university, the first one, the first big
committees I was on was the Rutter Lecture
Committee, which was a series of lectures to honor
the president who died shortly before I arrived at
Texas A&M. He was in the hospital. I had some notes,
but by the time I arrived for the August beginning
of the 1970s session. On this committee, there
were a number of people. I remember Professor
Chalk, especially, with economics. And I can go
back and find that material if you are interested
in the first lecture. I'm interested in
everything right now, Dr. Campbell, because
everything has so many tie-ins to a lot of the other
things that I'm hearing. And then again,
everybody saw everything from different
viewpoints. And of course, it illustrates the
interaction with other parts of the committee.
Our first speaker was Jacques Barzun, the former
president of Columbia. Did you say these lectures
were in honor of the president's brother? Yes. We
only had two of them, and then it just died out. But
Bar-Zoon, if we were going to pay, I think we were
going to pay them something like $10,000 for a
series of lectures, and then we would publish
them. The Bar-Zoon, Jacques Bar-Zoon, he has
noticed he's called the Cultural History of
Columbia Observation Saturday on the third final
session of the lecture. Are these to talk about
Rutter himself? No, nothing to do with Rutter. His
lecture was on manners, on the history of manners.
However, he never sent us the manuscript. It's
also an interesting anecdote-wise that
our president at this time was our new president,
Williams. And Barzun never flew. So he was coming
by train, and we were all in the auditorium waiting
for his lecture, and he hadn't arrived yet. His
train was stuck somewhere in Waco. And I was
sitting with President Williams, and Mr. Eskel
Monroe got in his car and had driven me to Waco. We
had Barzun somewhere between here and there.
Well, Williams was regaling the audience. But
Barzun finally came. That was his first of three
lectures. The series was on manners.
The committee. came through with a second letter
lecture the following year. Of course, now this is
April of
1972. In 1972, it was also important because we
established the chapter of Kappa Delta Pi, which
was the honorary society in education that
included women. Kappa Delta Pi. Kappa Delta Pi.
I'll make a copy of this, which gives you the names
of the first people. I had long been a member of that
society and was one of the installing officers for
the initiation team. At that time, Frank Huber was
also initiated into Kappa Delta Pi first.
Is that still in? Is that an active chapter? Yes,
that is still active. It's more or less serving our
undergraduates now because Phi Delta Kappa has
now admitted women. But in 1972, it did not. And as a
new college of education, we had mostly women. A
little anecdote wise, I asked one of the corps
members one time, how many corps members were in my
education classes? And they said they wanted to
see what girls looked like. Anyway, we had the
monopoly on girls. Oh, that's cute. So we
established Kappa Delta Phi. We also had a
civilian student council at that time, which was .
I was also appointed in 1972 by President William
A. Centineo committee, and a little bit later for
the centennial committee for the diversity. What
were the duties in that committee? Well, in the
bicentennial committee, we never really did a
lot. But with the centennial committee, we made
arrangements to develop that film. that certain
spirit or whatever, I forgot what it was. We also
got Hill to do the carvings. That was
one of the things our committee did. And we
arranged for countless lectures. The 1976
lecture that I was mainly responsible for was when
R. Freeman Butts, who was a leader in the history of
education and was the co-chairman of my
doctorate, I came here from Columbia to speak.
I had to check on this, but I was active in the Texas
Association of College Teachers since coming
here. I was twice president.
I was president at the centennial. I think I was
president again when the Senate was developed.
Texas Association of College Teachers spoke for
officers and administrators in Austin.
President Miller was inaugurated. I was a host of
that. I can't remember. I
remember that. I was here for that one. I do
remember. Miller's? There was one. That escapes
me. And Miller was also the only person, to my
knowledge, who joined TACT.
Mr. Campbell, when were the women admitted to Phi
Delta Kappa, and was that a local decision, or was
it the national association?
It was a national, and it came as a result of court
cases. I think you can confirm that. And Mark, in
our department, is the president this year. I was
just initiated into it last Monday night. Oh,
well, I just don't have time because I have three
night classes, and by Thursday I'm so tired I can
hardly think of going up.
But back in the early 70s, you see, the women had
that. Don't wait. I really think Kappa Delta Pi,
it's just as old as Phi Delta Kappa, and in my way of
thinking, it was a greater... organization that
had admitted
first honor societies to blacks and women, and
that was an honorary member. When we look at all of
these things that were happening back when you
just first got here in the 70s, and you were
instrumental in working very actively in a lot of
committees, the mission of the college was still
the same as it is now, or as it was for any land grant
university, not just the College of Education.
But teaching, research, and service have been the
focal point. Has that changed, or has the emphasis
changed on those, in your perception, within this
college? like more pressure or more emphasis on
research versus teaching or survey. No different
departments concentrate more on one. I think that
under Dean Buber, that as far as tenure and
promotion is concerned, the stress was on
publication, which It's easy to measure,
and of course it gives national knowledge, and
that was important, because teachers came here,
even in Texas, nobody knew that they were going to
be taught with a parent-teacher. That was
probably the biggest supplier and most respected
supplier of teachers. So we had to get visibility.
How can I document that about it being the most
respected supplier of teachers? I know I've heard
it a couple of times. Well, I think you can. the best
place to find out first how many you're producing.
And it's possible that TEA would be the best source
there for how many we're producing. I think you're
also maybe even leading the nation in math and
science. That's what I heard. But this is just
hearsay, of course. I'm more conscious of the now,
you know, since visiting with you, about
verifying, you know, historically some of these
things, and that's the thing that I'm not sure. Of
course, I don't see this as much historical as an
oral history. It is. So when somebody else can use
this data for what it might be worth in terms of...
So it's not absolutely essential that I have, if I
say something like what you just said, I don't have
to, you know, come back and triangulate in such a
way that it's verified right here that we do
produce the most or that... Well, you can say that I
said that. Now, I may be wrong. Well, whoever,
several other people have said it, and I've seen
it, and I've heard the dean say it at meetings. Our
memories are tricky. You're not... Oh, sure. And
that's why we need to, just like in our income tax,
we have to keep records. And, but... I would say
that Dean Corrigan's style is
quite different
and feels that the worth of a person should
be considered, not just publication, so that we
could put someone forward for them as a
distinguished publication list as we used to.
What is this person's contributions and get along
without this person, and that's sort of the
criteria. There still is a penalty, so to speak,
for not publishing. I know I had at least one person
say that they have paid the price by not getting a
full professorship because they have not
published, even though they've been here for 30
years. Yes, you see, the publication record is the
easiest thing to measure, and it's the one thing
that Well, what about
service, though? I'm seeing a lot of visibility on
the people that are out there working with, you
know, things like the principal center, all those
different conferences. I'm happy because that's
where I've been. But doesn't that also provide a
lot of visibility for the college? What kind of
service do you mean? Well, like going out into the
educational field and doing some collaborative.
I guess maybe that's part of, is it part of service
or part of teaching? Yes, yes it is. And I think,
here for instance, I have a few things in the
folder. I used to, when I, this is 1973, have
students go out to the the girls club, the boys
club, child development centers, and contribute
their time. This was before we had a lot of field
services. Now, of course, this is done to a greater
extent. How did that change? It helped the
community. Sure. It really got the community
involved. The field service activities, and I
know they have changed, but when did they start
changing? Because I know teachers would never
even get in the classroom. We didn't until it was
time for student teaching after we'd already been
three or four years in school. That's why I taught
the foundation courses. I'd get them at the
beginning and I would make arrangements. I
couldn't get them into public schools very
easily. It was very complicated to get them into
observe. And so I got them into the girls club, the
boys club, all the various church education. Is it
easier now to get into the public schools? Oh, yes.
We have someone who's in charge of that. But they
didn't have that when I started here in the early
70s. And in order to get them into the school, I
would have to make rather detailed arrangements
and then sometimes relationships. Who's in
charge of that kind of activity? Tim Blair. He's
student teacher. Yeah, that's the field
experience. Oh, I see. We get people out earlier
now. But it was a big administrative position. And
while I was teaching classes, I couldn't do that so
well. And it was not good to give weeks in advance.
But if they were contributing to the girls club,
the boys club, some of these time going on a regular
basis. It wasn't as bad if they didn't show up
sometime. In this work that you did, like these
things with students, Dr. Campbell, what about
because of the growth of the college, has that
affected your ability to, not your ability, but
how you're able to work and interact with students
just because of the sheer numbers? Oh, I don't
really feel that way at all. A&M has been
remarkable. I've never been anywhere that,
especially with students, from my own doctoral
experience, very self-determining. One of the
things that Dean Hubert had, which still I bet was
this, you had to be here after you were here,
whereas I taught at Brooklyn very often, faculty
came in for their classes and maybe one or two hours
of office. Is that a policy of the college, or does
it go by department? Or is it an understood thing?
It's not just... Well, I think it came with the
Corps and with the military. I mean, even now, when
you say that the faculty are expected to be, are
normally here, is it, are you told by the
department? No, no, no. It's just sort of a habit. I
even feel a little bit guilty if I go to the dentist.
Because you're used to being there. So we do have a
lot of time. As always, though, students very
often hesitate to come in. We have this mentor
service. It's voluntary, is it not? It's
voluntary. Are you one of the mentors? Yes, but I
just started this year, and I haven't had a single
mentoree. OK, but that's interesting. How many
graduate students committees do you serve on
average? I would say 50. And I think I'm just well
over-subscribed. And the last couple of years,
I've been trying to cut back, because I do not share
very many, because people do not do historical
dissertations. But since I teach the
foundations,
I get them early. I don't want to do historical
visitations. They're hard. They're very
time-consuming. Now, we've talked about the
different things that have affected the
different changes and so forth. How do you see the
college now versus at the beginning? as it is
viewed by others or by outsiders. I've had some
strong comments about, you know, not a put down
necessarily, but that the College of Education
was I don't know what you mean. Oh, I see what you
mean. How do people view the college, and how has
that changed? When I first came here, I was quite
delighted, because it seemed that education was
respected. Of course, that's very unusual. You
had the respect of all of the colleges. And I think
that Corrigan has the respect of everyone who
knows him. I think the problem with education
and its respect is that, historically, there's
been a profession for slaves. The politicians
themselves have not been happy about it. It took a
long time for them to accept the lawyers as
optional workers for expanding the mind and so on.
but
education
is probably the most complex, and we don't have the
hope, and I think we do make claims that we're a
science, but my feeling is essentially we're
doing the best we can, and I think there's been a lot
of progress in expanding several phases since
I've
been here. When I came back to develop
competency-based programs, that was the main
point that we put everything to spell out the
terminal behaviors, present a number of
competencies. Is that not the case now? But we've
been developing all of our courses on that. And I
can't remember the year, but it started to affect
other parts of the university, where if we were
going to produce history, we would also have to
develop courses around competencies that was in
education that you can't hit the other
departments. When you say you can't hit, who was
doing the hitting? Well, that was the state. Oh,
okay. The state was, all of our programs had to be
competency-based. Now, the Attorney General,
and this is a date you have to verify if you're
interested. Thank you. I had a
great deal to do with this, how to teach,
professions, how to teach. And after that settled
down, and
right now, of course, we're involved in
completely dismantling. the climate or the, you
know, within this department, because this is the
department that will be the hardest hit, I'm
assuming. Yes, we are working on what might be
superior programs if we can develop a five-year
certification program. Are you involved in this
process? No, I am not involved. I'm on one service.
slightly active in one community, which is
developing. If we could get
interdisciplinary majors to truly liberal arts,
I think this would... But we're working on a
five-year plan, which the state may not approve
of. Oh, that'd be decided. We have... To get this
new program online
by January, the
sheets are
quite unreasonable as to say to dismantle and
restructure a program that allows no more than 18
hours. I think this will not include reading
courses. But that you would major in another
field, it has put a great deal of pressure on us.
We've gone through before. And survived. And
survived. I think people are thinking very well of
teachers, although I don't have undergraduate
seminar. Oh, okay. I do not teach students. I just
period people off. And these will not really
affect any of the graduate programs? Not unless
they abolish the major in education at all. There
is the possibility, you see, that... It would be
abolished
completely. I did some research on the history of,
more or less chronicled the attitude of teachers
in the ancient world. And when you see they were,
they isolated teachers. They said, okay, when we
start meeting teachers in public schools, we'll
put them in normal It's voice activated. I guess
I've been taking too much of your time. No, it's
voice activated. No, that's fine. No, we're doing
great. Anyway, we're in another phase here where I
think that... A lot of changes, again, that we're
looking at that are going to carry us perhaps,
well, for sure, into the 20th or 21st century with
possibly a whole new model. It could be that we'll
have a terrible teacher shortage. I'm hearing
that a lot. And we already have one on the way, you
know. And also teacher retention, which is
something that bothers me a lot, because maybe
we're putting out all these teachers, but are they
staying out there? Well, I think the best ones
aren't. And the problem is, you're a
conscientious person doing teacher education,
but we're not reforming the schools. I think it's
immoral to take that kind of training. And the
people that will stay are the ones that are going to
find the easiest way in class, so they don't have to
talk to them. Burnout. I mean, of course, I'm not in
the field, but you can't both be on that. I think
that if you're going to perform teacher
education, you just can't perform teacher
training. I feel we can change the whole system.
But they have tried to reduce class size. Yes. Dr.
Campbell, since you arrived at Texas A&M, because
you've worked under two administrations, plus
the interim in between, what are some of the
highlights, maybe a highlight of each? of each
era. I'm calling it an era because it was very
distinct. You know, half has been Dean Hubert
within the life of the College of Education. Now,
this second half, which will be hitting 20 years
pretty soon, is, you know, just a little bit about,
you know, the highlights. I also am going to ask you
about, you know, your own contribution and what
you feel the best about. But you have a lot of
insights and with your historical background,
you know, your anecdotes are priceless. But is
there something that stands out? Well, we've been
on 12-month appointments from the beginning.
And we don't have the summer or semester, once in a
while, talk of things. Did you have sabbatical
leave any time? No, no. No, I took the spring of 86
off without pay. I was just worn out. My brother
died, and my mother needed a little bit of
attention. And I was just worn out. It was probably
kind of burnout, so I arranged to take the spring
off. So I, you know, it seems as though I've been
involved semester after semester, pretty much
the same thing. I always do my teaching
differently. I'm continuing revising what I'm
doing, but I think I'm more like an enlisted man
peeking over the top of the trench, and I don't see
the whole picture. So the administrators would be
better to see the campaign.
I'm
meeting the class
that's going to do it. We're all leaders to our
campus. It's a very exciting time. I know you might
say that we haven't trained. I think that's the
year I got to be a professor, too. That would have
been about six years after you arrived, right?
Yes. Is that the average for our tenure? I got
tenured earlier, but I didn't get promoted at that
time. Now we usually have tenure and promotion at
the same time. The guy was tenured a few years
earlier. That's another thing that I was going to
ask you about. Interacting and collaborating
with your colleagues or within departments or
even outside of this department. Do you have an
opportunity to do very much of that? Quite a bit. I
don't think there's as much as there used to be.
There's not as much there anymore because we're
getting so big. But our department is such a hard
working department. Glenn Johnson, his health
broke down under the strain. He had a heart attack
under the strain. this department do to people? We
knocked them off. I think they worked very hard.
But there's so many certification programs,
so much work to do. We had David David temporarily.
He's been in our department ever since. I think he
came in 1980. A typical choice. Well, I was on one of
the breakfast luncheons with Corbin. I was trying
to remember some of the other candidates. One of
them I think I had known him because he was from
Kentucky, and I knew him because he'd gotten the
other two candidates we brought before him. And I
understand they were all pretty... All very good.
I can remember as a little anecdote why someone
said, well, why don't we go
to Maryland? Well, that's not the same. Oh, that's
great. Oh, another thing that might be of interest
is that... In 1982, I had proposed that we just have
study abroad. Donna Norton and I developed
courses.
And Donna Norton got a grant from
Conoco,
which was lost. And we had to get to the
coordination board. And believe it or not, there
was the feeling What can anybody learn? The
students were taken from here to go study there?
Yes, and we took 30 students in 1982 from the
National Affairs. It's changed so many times. But
they found this college very reasonable, and they
had contacts. So we got the foreign development
here. The study abroad. and I think comparative
education. Was this the first department to
initiate that? Well, it's the first in education,
as far as I know, and less agriculture. The Ag Ed, of
course, had extension programs. There's been a
lot of international work with other parts of
college, but I know we have more courses in the
summer. I don't know if I asked you this earlier.
I'm in another conversation. about how you felt
that the college was achieving its mission on the
teaching and research.